IGNITE-14069 added release notes for 2.10 version (#8748)
apache/ignite: RELEASE_NOTES.txt

===========================

Apache Ignite In-Memory Distributed Database 2.10.0
-----------------------------------------------------------

(!) WARNINGS:
* The community accepted MVCC API discontinuation in future releases
* Enabling/disabling WAL doesn't work properly on unstable topology and will be fixed soon
* Spring Data moved to ignite-extension and will be released separately
* Node.js, Python, PHP thin clients moved to a dedicated repository

Ignite:
* Added API for checking network connectivity between all nodes in a cluster
* Added API to get segment sizes
* Added InitialSize and MaxSize to DataRegion metrics
* Added RebalancingPartitionsTotal metrics
* Added TDE CLI management tool
* Added TDE cache key rotation
* Added a metric for processed keys when rebuilding indexes
* Added an ability to check driver metrics in Cassandra store

> * Added cluster performance profiling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added a cluster performance profiling
```

> * Added cluster performance tool to build cluster performance report

Reviewer 2: Should be excluded (this is feature from the`ignite-extensions` module)

Author: Fixed.

> * Added cluster performance tool to build cluster performance report

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added a cluster performance tool to build cluster performance report
```

* Added cluster snapshot security permissions

> * Added command to control.sh to get an arbitrary Metric

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added a command to control.sh to get an arbitrary Metric
```

> * Added command to control.sh to get an arbitrary SystemView

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added a command to control.sh to get an arbitrary SystemView
```

* Added control.sh API - schedule & cancel
* Added control.sh API - status
* Added core defragmentation functions
* Added deadlock detection for cache entry reentrant locks
* Added defragmentation JMX API for schedule/cancel/status
* Added defragmentation parallelism implementation
* Added events for snapshot operation state
* Added explicit command.sh option to enable experimental commands

> * Added extension of tracing of communication socket write with number of sent bytes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added an extension for tracing the communication socket write with a number of sent bytes
```

* Added fallback to full partition rebalancing in case historical supplier failed to read all necessary data updates from WAL
* Added generic to maintenance mode feature
* Added implementation readiness probe REST endpoint
* Added new advanced heuristics for historical rebalance
* Added new checkpoint metrics
* Added new event firing before query execution
* Added new event for node join validation failure
* Added new index manipulation commands to control.sh
* Added new metrics framework in ZookeeperDiscovery
* Added new type of WAL records to track atomic updates on backup nodes
* Added non markers checkpoint implementation
* Added output IgniteSystemProperties via control.sh
* Added special mode for maintenance of Ignite node. Employing Maintenance Mode for clearing corrupted PDS files
* Added stopping warm-up to control.sh
* Added support to graceful shutdown for ZookeeperDiscoverySpi
* Added system view for binary metadata
* Added system view for metastorage items

> * Added system view walker generator wrong sorts imports

Reviewer: It's hard to get to the meaning of this. Probably we should paraphrase this one.

Author: Fixed.

* Added thin client support for Spring Transactions
* Added thread dumps on failure processor invocations enabled by default
* Added warming up strategy

> * Fixed AuthenticationContext does not contain subject address when subject is IgniteClient

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed AuthenticationContext did not contain subject address when subject is IgniteClient
```

> * Fixed BPlus tree lock retries limit reached with sqlOnHeapCacheEnabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed BPlus tree lock retried limit reached with sqlOnHeapCacheEnabled
```

> * Fixed BinaryMarshaller needs to use context class loader for deserialization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed BinaryMarshaller needed to use context class loader for deserialization
```

* Fixed CLI command to execute maintenance action in corrupted PDS scenario
* Fixed ComputeScheduleExample

> * Fixed Continuous Query buffers to reduce heap usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed Continuous Query that buffered to reduce heap usage
```

Author: buffers is a noun here :-)

Reviewer: My fault :) Missing context sometimes leads to funny misunderstanding :)

> * Fixed DurableBackgroundTask can abandon incomplete task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed DurableBackgroundTask that could abandon incomplete task
```

> * Fixed FileWriteAheadLogManager creates 0-length WAL segments and cannot start later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed FileWriteAheadLogManager creates 0-length WAL segments and could not start later
```

> * Fixed GridCacheOffheapManager which ignores candidate pages count for index partition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed GridCacheOffheapManager which ignored candidate pages count for index partition
```

> * Fixed IgniteCache#isClosed() returns false on server node even if the cache had been closed before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed IgniteCache#isClosed() returned false on server node even if the cache had been closed before
```

> * Fixed IgniteScheduler has to run inside the Ignite Sandbox with appropriate security context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed IgniteScheduler that had to run inside the Ignite Sandbox with appropriate security context
```

* Fixed NullPointerException at dumping long running operations
* Fixed NullPointerException due to race on cache stop and transaction commit
* Fixed NullPointerException during Cassandra Store initialization with PRIMITIVE strategy
* Fixed NullPointerException in IgniteServiceProcessor when destroying a cache
* Fixed NullPointerException in logSupplierDone(UUID nodeId)

> * Fixed NullPointerException may occur on client start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed NullPointerException on client start
```

* Fixed NullPointerException on tx recovery
* Fixed NullPointerException with empty persistence data region
* Fixed OOM on creating rebalance iterator while rebalancing cache with large values

> * Fixed OpenCensus module has no runtime dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed OpenCensus module had no runtime dependencies
```

> * Fixed Query cancellation freezes on local lazy queries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed Query cancellation froze on local lazy queries
```

* Fixed UnsupportedOperationException: null when stopping grid
* Fixed WAL archive cleanup from checkpoint to rollover

> * Fixed WAL compression doesn't work for binary recovery

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed WAL compression did not work for binary recovery
```

> * Fixed WAL iterators require WRITE permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed WAL iterators required WRITE permissions
```

> * Fixed WAL segments do not released on releaseHistoryForPreloading()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed WAL segments did not released on releaseHistoryForPreloading()
```

* Fixed assertion error when expiration of cache entries, which relate to a non-persistent data region in the persistent cluster
* Fixed assertion error which happens on stale latch's acknowledge
* Fixed blocking section in GridNioWorker and GridNioClientWorker which leads to false positive blocking thread detection
* Fixed cache Interceptors deserialization on client nodes

> * Fixed checkpoint read lock fail if it is taking under write lock during the stopping node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed checkpoint read lock fail if it was taking under write lock during the stopping node
```

* Fixed checkpoint write lock missed during snapshot operation
* Fixed client node with a static encrypted cache generation on node join
* Fixed connection recovery timeout
* Fixed control.sh baseline must printout node IP addresses

> * Fixed control.sh doesn't print results to stdout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed control.sh did not print results to stdout
```

> * Fixed control.sh doesn't start if JMX port was set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed control.sh did not start if JMX port was set
```

* Fixed control.sh shows passwords in the output
* Fixed control.sh validate_indexes throws CorruptedTreeException and fails server node during check
* Fixed critical system error when unregister a JMX bean
* Fixed deadlock between grid-timeout-worker and a thread opening a communication connection
* Fixed deadlock between methods from GridEncryptionManager
* Fixed deadlock in IgniteServiceProcessor
* Fixed deadlock on Cache.putAll(Map<KV>)
* Fixed deadlock on multiple cache delete
* Fixed deadlock when receiving ComputeTask result by IgniteClient

> * Fixed deb package dependence on a non-existent package which can't be installed on Debian 10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed deb package dependence on a non-existent package which could not be installed on Debian 10
```

* Fixed defragmentation only one index defragmented
* Fixed deserialization of IBinaryObject containing an IBinaryObject field fails
* Fixed disabling archiving + walCompactionEnabled probably broke reading from wal on server restart
* Fixed disco-notifier-worker handles IgniteInterruptedCheckedException incorrectly
* Fixed duplication in select query during partition eviction for caches with 0 backups
* Fixed error during purges by expiration: Unknown page type

> * Fixed exception is discarded in GridCacheProcessor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed exception was discarded in GridCacheProcessor
```

* Fixed exchange worker, waiting for new task from queue, considered as blocked
* Fixed failed WalModeChangeAdvancedSelfTest.testMaintenanceIsSkippedIfWasFixedManuallyOnDowntime
* Fixed few issues of command warm-up in control.sh
* Fixed handling of a rebalancing with disabled WAL
* Fixed help information for control.sh --property help
* Fixed high contention on GridCachePartitionExchangeManager.ExchangeFutureSet#values.
* Fixed historical iterator for atomic group should transfer few more rows than required
* Fixed incorrect calculation of WAL segments that should be deleted from WAL archive
* Fixed incorrect topology snapshot logger output about coordinator change
* Fixed incorrect usage of Class.isAssignableFrom in SystemViewLocal and SystemViewMBean classes
* Fixed incorrect work of predicates (< and >) in where clause with compound primary key

> * Fixed local metastorage system view failure if unmarshalled values present

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed local metastorage system view failure if unmarshalled values were present
```

> * Fixed metastore which may leave uncompleted write futures during node stop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed metastore which might leave uncompleted write futures during node stop
```

> * Fixed model classes which require manual deserialization if used inside Job loaded by p2p

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed model classes which required manual deserialization if used inside Job loaded by p2p
```

> * Fixed operations started on client nodes are not traced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed operations started on client nodes were not traced
```

> * Fixed partial index rebuild fails in case indexed cache contains different data types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed partial index rebuild failed in case indexed cache contained different data types
```

> * Fixed partition loss detection is not working if a dynamic cache is not started on a client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed partition loss detection was not working if a dynamic cache is not started on a client
```

> * Fixed partition loss detection is not working if a dynamic cache is not started on a client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed partition loss detection was not working if a dynamic cache was not started on a client
```

> * Fixed performance drop when there are many thin clients per server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed performance drop when there were many thin clients per server
```

> * Fixed performance drop when there are many thin clients per server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed performance drop when there were many thin clients per server
```

* Fixed pingNode(InetSocketAddress, UUID, UUID) failure pinging nodes with unresolved addresses
* Fixed print warning if unordered map used for bulk update operation on atomic cache

> * Fixed rebalance might hangs in no final state though all partitions are owned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed rebalance might hang in no final state though all partitions were owned
```

> * Fixed release a segment if it is not present in FileWriteAheadLogManager#reserve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed release a segment if it was not present in FileWriteAheadLogManager#reserve
```

* Fixed removing expired cache entries
* Fixed restorePartitionStates triggers FailureHandler on node startup
* Fixed rows buffers usage by reducing index for simple one-way reducer
* Fixed scan query failure with an assertion error: Unexpected row key
* Fixed security issue in JMX configuration using ignite.sh
* Fixed speed base throttling unexpectedly degraded to zero

> * Fixed spring data integration which doesn't introspect the fields of the key object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed spring data integration which did not introspect the fields of the key object
```

* Fixed starvation in mgmt pool caused by  MetadataTask execution

> * Fixed synchronization issues when different classloaders are used for deployment of same class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed synchronization issues when different classloaders were used for deployment of same class
```

> * Fixed transaction commit completes successfully if partition is lost on commit phase

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed transaction commit completed successfully if a partition was lost on commit phase
```

> * Fixed validate index does not stop after process of control.sh was interrupted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed validate index did not stop after process of control.sh was interrupted
```

> * Fixed validateKeyAndValue which attempts to deserialize key and value when QueryEntity.fields is not set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed validateKeyAndValue which attempted to deserialize key and value when QueryEntity.fields was not set
```

* Fixed waiting for completion of operations on indexes before cache stop
* Moved ClusterMetrics to the new metrics framework
* Moved TcpDiscoveryStatistics to new metrics framework
* Moved spring-data modules to ignite-extensions
* Removed 'default' cache usage from REST API

> * Removed WALPointer and use FileWALPointer

Reviewer: Not sure if I get it right. What does "use" imply here?

Author: Fixed.

* Removed ability to delete segments from the middle of WAL archive
* Removed unnecessary dependency to curator-client from ZookeeperDiscoverySpi
* Removed unneeded ZkPinger from ZookeeperDiscovery

SQL:
* Added lazy flag to synthetic SELECT used by first step of DML query
* Added tracing of SQL queries
* Added unification of fallback properties for SSL settings as per Java standard

> * Fixed REPLICATED cache cannot be left-joined to PARTITIONED

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed REPLICATED cache could not be left-joined to PARTITIONED
```

> * Fixed decimal columns in SQL result set have invalid precision and scale

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed decimal columns in SQL result set had invalid precision and scale
```

> * Fixed exception which occurs on SQL caches when client reconnect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed exception occured on SQL caches during the client reconnection
```

> * Fixed tracing of SELECT queries causes incorrect span inheritance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed tracing of SELECT queries caused incorrect span inheritance
```

* Fixed transformation of sub-queries to JOINs when possible

JDBC/ODBC:
* Added ODBC SQLNumResultCols for prepared statement

> * Added ODBC driver assigns SQL_BINARY type to DATE fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added ODBC driver assigned SQL_BINARY type to DATE fields
```

> * Added ODBC driver shows real nullability info

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added ODBC driver showed real nullability info
```

* Added ODBC implementation of SQLRowCount for select queries
* Added ODBC support of SQL_ATTR_ROW_ARRAY_SIZE with value more than one

> * Fixed thin driver reports incorrect property names

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed thin driver reported incorrect property names
```

Java thin-client:
* Added non-blocking socket IO usage
* Added support for IPv6 addresses
* Added thin Client Continuous Query
* Added thin client Java API - async API
* Added thin client Kubernetes discovery
* Fixed CHM get/remove on each request to server

> * Fixed connect/disconnect during topology update may lead to partition divergence in ignite-sys-cache

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed connect/disconnect during topology update might lead to partition divergence in ignite-sys-cache
```

> * Fixed exception type is lost on rethrow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed exception type was lost on rethrow
```

* Fixed message not fully read by client after SECURITY_VIOLATION error

> * Fixed thin client silently closes channel after inactivity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed thin client silently closed channel after inactivity
```

> * Fixed thin clients cannot access the Ignite Service deployed through UriDeploymentSpi

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed thin clients could not access the Ignite Service deployed through UriDeploymentSpi
```

* Fixed unsupported protocol version exception when getting cache configuration from Java thin client

Thin-client:
* Moved Node.js thin client to a separate git repo
* Moved PHP thin client to a separate git repo
* Moved Python thin client to a separate git repo

> Ignite .NET:

Reviewer: My point below is to highlight that the issue is resolved (i.e., it no longer exists). So I suggest sticking to the past tense.

Author: Agree, I'll recheck.

* Added CacheConfiguration.NodeFilter
* Added Partitions and UpdateBatchSize to SqlFieldsQuery
* Added RendezvousAffinityFunction.BackupFilter
* Added includeExpired to ContinuousQuery
* Added thin client service invocation
* Added thin client transactions
* Fixed CachePartialUpdateException: failed to update keys (using Cache.PutAsync)
* Fixed DateTime usage as a cache key or value
* Fixed GetAffinity failure with NullPointerException on client node

> * Fixed LINQ provider emits incorrect table alias for queries with JOIN and GROUP BY combined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed LINQ provider emited incorrect table alias for queries with JOIN and GROUP BY combined
```

> * Fixed Service can't assign correct type to passed array parameters (.Net -> .Net call)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed Service could not assign correct type to passed array parameters (.Net -> .Net call)
```

> * Fixed Service loses returned array type information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed Service lost returned array type information
```

* Fixed binary configuration for Compute API invocation
* Fixed binary configurations of Ignite Java service params and result when calling it from Ignite.NET

> * Fixed child processes become zombies when persistence is used with direct-io on Linux

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed child processes became zombies when persistence was used with direct-io on Linux
```

* Fixed client should have peerClassLoading property in the IgniteConfiguration class

> * Fixed dispose hangs when continuous query is active on .NET Core 3.x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed dispose hangs when continuous query was active on .NET Core 3.x
```

* Fixed incorrect GetTotalPhysicalMemory result in Docker
* Fixed interoperable DateTime

> * Fixed misleading LINQ exception when expression can't be translated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed misleading LINQ exception when expression could not be translated
```

> * Fixed service can't assign correct type to passed array parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixed service that could not assign correct type to passed array parameters
```
